Add great expectations post (#330)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-08-14-data-pipelines-production-ready-great-expectations.md

---
layout: post
title: "Make Your Trino Data Pipelines Production Ready Using Great Expectations"
author: "Brian Olsen, Brian Zhan"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> Great Expectations is an open source Python library that allows you to write

Reviewer: I feel like you need some kind of hook to start things off. Ask a question, make a value statement, that sort of thing. The intro sentence being a definition is a little dry and doesn't motivate readers to keep going.

detailed tests called
[expectations](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/terms/expectation/)
against your data. Users write these expectations to run validations against the
data as it enters your system. These expectations are expressed as methods in
Python and stored in JSON and YAML files. One great advantage of expectations is

> the human readable documentation that results from these tests. As you role out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the human readable documentation that results from these tests. As you roll out
```

different versions of the code, you get alerted to any unexpected changes and 

> have version specific generated documentation for what changed. In this blog, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have version-specific generated documentation for what changed. In this blog, 
```

we'll show you how to write expectations on tables in Trino!

![](/assets/blog/data-pipelines-production-ready-great-expectations/trino-ge.png)

<!--more-->

## The need for data quality

Managing data pipelines is not for the faint of heart. Nodes fail, you run
out of memory, bursty traffic causes abnormal behavior, and that’s just the tip
of the Apache Iceberg 😉. Lots of Trino community members build sophisticated

> data pipelines and data applications using Trino. This received a turbo-boost 

Reviewer: It's a little unclear what 'this' is referring to when you say "This received," I'd reword.

when Trino added a 
[fault tolerance]({% post_url 2022-05-05-tardigrade-launch %}) mode to safeguard
against some of these failures when executing long-running and 
resource-intensive queries. 

Aside from all the infrastructure problems that concern data teams, another
category of problems that has been the silent killer for quite some time is data
quality. Faulty data comes in, which can either cause data pipelines to fail, or

> possibly go unnoticed and cause inaccurate downstream reporting. Tacit knowledge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it can possibly go unnoticed and cause inaccurate downstream reporting. Tacit knowledge
```

is scattered among domain experts, technical experts, and the code and data
itself. Maintenance becomes time-consuming and expensive. Documentation gets out
of date and unreliable. This is why using data quality checks using libraries 
like [Great Expectations](https://greatexpectations.io/) is so important when
writing ETL applications.

## Improve data quality in Trino with Great Expectations

> As data quality becomes more in the forefront of the Trino community, the Great

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As data quality moves to the forefront of the Trino community, the Great
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure something can be _more_ forefront-y, and this wording is hard to parse. If we want to emphasize "it was already really important, but now it's basically the most important," it might take a reword to make it clear that that's the point being made.

Author: yup bad grammar :)

Expectations and Trino communities have partnered to do some events together:
* [Trino meetup to discuss Great Expectations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pcqAOq3O3Ts&list=PLFnr63che7wZij92ynF_egatbsrH7by7T&index=3)
* [Great Expectations meetup to discuss Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SieRmibb0U).
* [Superconductive](https://superconductive.ai/) joined this year’s mini Trino 
Summit event 
[Cinco de Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfJ63DNbAuI&list=PLFnr63che7wYDHjUsmp43THLmAlqPDHlM)
to showcase using 
[managed solutions for Great Expectations and Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9HE6LawCHP8&list=PLFnr63che7wYDHjUsmp43THLmAlqPDHlM&index=7).

> Today, we’re showcasing a demo that showcases a scenario with Trino running as

Reviewer: "showcasing a demo that showcases" sounds very redundant, maybe "walking through a demo that showcases" or something along those lines just so it's not repetitive.

Author: lolz

> Today, we’re showcasing a demo that showcases a scenario with Trino running as

Author: ```suggestion
Today, we’re walking through a demo that showcases a scenario with Trino running as
```

the datalake query engine with multiple phases of data transformations on some

> Pokemon data sets. At each phase, we need to validate the data is in the correct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pokemon data sets. At each phase, we need to validate that the data is in the correct
```

schema, counts, and various other factors to validate.

So in the context of this demo, we’re going to be using Trino as the query
engine of a data lakehouse. For this, you can use various table formats. To
index and read the data, we’re going to use the Hive table format for landing

> tables and Iceberg table format for the structure and consume tables. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tables and the Iceberg table format for the structure and consume tables. This is
```

mainly because Trino currently doesn’t support reading CSV files from Iceberg 

> yet, but also conveys the level of flexibility you have in a data lake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yet, but it also conveys the level of flexibility you have in a data lake.
```

## Trino and Great Expectations demo

In this scenario, we’re going to ingest Pokemon pokedex data and Pokemon Go 
spawn location data which lands as raw CSV files in our data lake. We then use

> Trino’s Hive catalog to read the data from the landing files and clean up and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino’s Hive catalog to read the data from the landing files, clean up, and 
```

optimize that raw data into more performant ORC files in the structure tables. 

![](/assets/blog/data-pipelines-production-ready-great-expectations/trino-ge-lakehouse.svg)

The last step is to join and transform the spawn data and pokedex data into a
single table that is cleaned and ready to be utilized by a data analyst, data
scientist, or other data consumer. Every area of the pipeline where the data is

> transformed opens up a vulnerability as the state can go from good to bed as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transformed opens up a vulnerability, as the state can go from good to bad when
```

> infrastructure fails or is updated as newer versions of the pipeline roll out.

Reviewer: The `as newer versions of the pipeline roll out` make this sentence _very_ long. If we can afford to drop it or split this sentence up, that might be better.

Author: Fixed by breaking up the sentence

This is where adding Great Expectations is crucial.

Now that you have a better understanding of the scenario, feel free to watch the
video below and try running it yourself!

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h6UYOilESfQ" width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" style="border:1px solid #CCC; border-width:1px; 
margin-bottom:5px; max-width: 100%;" allowfullscreen=""> 
</iframe>

<a class="btn btn-pink btn-md waves-effect waves-light" href="https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake/blob/main/tutorials/expecting-greatness-from-trino.md">Try this Trino demo yourself >></a>

## Conclusion

> Data quality is growing in importance as the complexity of data lakes increase.

Reviewer: Similar to earlier, it might be worth stressing it was always important, but that now it's paramount.

> It is a necessity that avoids faulty data and improves the trust that data

Reviewer: "Data quality is a necessity that avoids faulty data" feels a little like a truism. It might be better to highlight why faulty data is a problem (errors, incorrect insights, etc.) and stress that avoiding it is crucial.

Author: I just removed the "avoids faulty data" and kept the focus on improving the trust that data consumers have

---
layout: post

> title: "Make Your Trino Data Pipelines Production Ready Using Great Expectations"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Make your Trino data pipelines production ready with Great Expectations"
```

author: "Brian Olsen, Brian Zhan"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> One of the important aspects to writing good data pipelines is ensuring data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An important aspect of a good data pipeline is ensuring data quality. 
```

> quality by testing the data is what you're expecting it to be at any given

Reviewer 2: You need to verify that the data is what ..

> quality by testing the data is what you're expecting it to be at any given

Author: ```suggestion
You need to verify that the data is what you're expecting it to be at any given
```

> state. Great Expectations is an open source Python library that allows you to 

Reviewer 2: Python-based tool 

Its not just a library imho

> state. Great Expectations is an open source Python library that allows you to 

Author: ```suggestion
state. Great Expectations is an open source tool created in Python that allows you to 
```

write detailed tests called
[expectations](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/terms/expectation/)
against your data. Users write these expectations to run validations against the
data as it enters your system. These expectations are expressed as methods in

> Python and stored in JSON and YAML files. One great advantage of expectations is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python, and stored in JSON and YAML files. One great advantage of expectations is
```

the human readable documentation that results from these tests. As you roll out
different versions of the code, you get alerted to any unexpected changes and 

> have version-specific generated documentation for what changed. In this blog, 

Reviewer 2: Replace sentence  "In this blog.." with

Let's learn how to write ...

> have version-specific generated documentation for what changed. In this blog, 
> we'll show you how to write expectations on tables in Trino!

Author: ```suggestion
have version-specific generated documentation for what changed. Let's learn how
to write expectations on tables in Trino!
```

![](/assets/blog/data-pipelines-production-ready-great-expectations/trino-ge.png)

<!--more-->

## The need for data quality

Managing data pipelines is not for the faint of heart. Nodes fail, you run
out of memory, bursty traffic causes abnormal behavior, and that’s just the tip

> of the Apache Iceberg 😉. Lots of Trino community members build sophisticated

Reviewer 2: remove this nod to Iceberg since noone will understand and its kinda unrelated..

> of the Apache Iceberg 😉. Lots of Trino community members build sophisticated

Author: ```suggestion
of the iceberg. Lots of Trino community members build sophisticated
```

data pipelines and data applications using Trino. Building data pipelines in
Trino became more common with the addition of a

> [fault tolerance mode]({% post_url 2022-05-05-tardigrade-launch %}) to safeguard

Reviewer 2: fault-tolerant execution mode

> [fault tolerance mode]({% post_url 2022-05-05-tardigrade-launch %}) to safeguard

Author: ```suggestion
[fault-tolerant execution mode]({% post_url 2022-05-05-tardigrade-launch %}) to safeguard
```

> against some of these failures when executing long-running and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
against failures when executing long-running and 
```

resource-intensive queries. 

Aside from all the infrastructure problems that concern data teams, another

> category of problems that has been the silent killer for quite some time is data

Reviewer 2: lets not use "silent killer"

> category of problems that has been the silent killer for quite some time is data

Author: ```suggestion
category of problems that have been the silent problem for quite some time is data
```

quality. Faulty data comes in, which can either cause data pipelines to fail, or

> it can possibly go unnoticed and cause inaccurate downstream reporting. Tacit 

Reviewer 2: Avoid "tacit"

> it can possibly go unnoticed and cause inaccurate downstream reporting. Tacit 
> knowledge is scattered among domain experts, technical experts, and the code and

Author: ```suggestion
it can possibly go unnoticed and cause inaccurate downstream reporting. 
Knowledge is scattered among domain experts, technical experts, and the code and
```

important when writing ETL applications.

## Improve data quality in Trino with Great Expectations

As data quality moves to the forefront of the Trino community, the Great
Expectations and Trino communities have partnered to do some events together:
* [Trino meetup to discuss Great Expectations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pcqAOq3O3Ts&list=PLFnr63che7wZij92ynF_egatbsrH7by7T&index=3)
* [Great Expectations meetup to discuss Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SieRmibb0U).
* [Superconductive](https://superconductive.ai/) joined this year’s mini Trino 
Summit event 
[Cinco de Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfJ63DNbAuI&list=PLFnr63che7wYDHjUsmp43THLmAlqPDHlM)
to showcase using 
[managed solutions for Great Expectations and Trino](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9HE6LawCHP8&list=PLFnr63che7wYDHjUsmp43THLmAlqPDHlM&index=7).

Today, we’re walking through a demo that showcases a scenario with Trino running as
the datalake query engine with multiple phases of data transformations on some
Pokemon data sets. At each phase, we need to validate that the data is in the correct
schema, counts, and various other factors to validate.

> So in the context of this demo, we’re going to be using Trino as the query

Reviewer 2: This whole paragraph is full of clutter - cut it down to 

we use trino with Hive table with CSV for ingest and then move to Iceberg

engine of a data lakehouse. For this, you can use various table formats. To
index and read the data, we’re going to use the Hive table format for landing
tables and the Iceberg table format for the structure and consume tables. This is
mainly because Trino currently doesn’t support reading CSV files from Iceberg 
yet, but it also conveys the level of flexibility you have in a data lake.

## Trino and Great Expectations demo

In this scenario, we’re going to ingest Pokemon pokedex data and Pokemon Go 
spawn location data which lands as raw CSV files in our data lake. We then use
Trino’s Hive catalog to read the data from the landing files, clean up, and 
optimize that raw data into more performant ORC files in the structure tables. 

![](/assets/blog/data-pipelines-production-ready-great-expectations/trino-ge-lakehouse.svg)

The last step is to join and transform the spawn data and pokedex data into a
single table that is cleaned and ready to be utilized by a data analyst, data
scientist, or other data consumer. Every area of the pipeline where the data is

> transformed opens up a vulnerability. The state can go from good to bad when

Reviewer 2: its not really a vulnerability .. is there a better term?

> transformed opens up a vulnerability. The state can go from good to bad when

Author: ```suggestion
transformed opens up a liability. The state can go from good to bad when
```

infrastructure fails or is updated as newer versions of the pipeline roll out.
This is where adding Great Expectations is crucial.

Now that you have a better understanding of the scenario, feel free to watch the

> video below and try running it yourself!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
video, and try running it yourself!
```

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h6UYOilESfQ" width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" style="border:1px solid #CCC; border-width:1px; 
margin-bottom:5px; max-width: 100%;" allowfullscreen=""> 
</iframe>

<a class="btn btn-pink btn-md waves-effect waves-light" href="https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake/blob/main/tutorials/expecting-greatness-from-trino.md">Try this Trino demo yourself >></a>

## Conclusion

> While data quality has always been important, it becomes a requirement as the

Reviewer 2: Thats not really true  .. you could say it was always a requirement .. and was ignored.. and it is still igorned .. but at least now we have tools to help

Author: I am stating that testing your data has always generally been important. Whether we were always focused on it or thinking it was important is a different matter.

Reviewer: I think it comes off better as "While data quality has always been a requirement, the standards for it get even higher as the complexity of data lakes increase" or something to that effect.
